Add initial application booting guide. (#123)
hanami/guides: content/v2.0/application/booting.md

---
title: Booting
order: 40
---

Hanami applications support a **prepared** state and a **booted** state.

> Whether your app is prepared or booted determines whether its components are **lazily loaded** on demand (prepared stated), or **eagerly loaded** up front (booted state).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether your app is prepared or booted determines whether its components are **lazily loaded** on demand (prepared state), or **eagerly loaded** up front (booted state).
```

> Whether your app is prepared or booted determines whether its components are **lazily loaded** on demand (prepared stated), or **eagerly loaded** up front (booted state).

Author: Indeed!

> This difference may not sound like much, but the ability of a prepared app to load _just enough_ of the app to undertake a particular task can be a huge performance advantage when it comes to testing, worker processes and other use cases where your app doesn't need every component to perform the job at hand.

Reviewer: Maybe add a sentence or expand the last one saying that a classic example is a rake task that migrates db or compile assets - it only needs a tiny portion of your app loaded and configured.

Author: Thanks - added!

> Conversely, a booted app is fully initialized, with every component ready to do its work. This is ideal whenever you want to incur initialization costs at boot time, such as when serving web requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Conversely, a booted app is fully initialized, with every component loaded and ready to do its work. This is ideal whenever you want to incur initialization costs at boot time, such as when serving web requests.
```

## Hanami.prepare

When you call `Hanami.prepare` (or use `require "hanami/prepare"`), Hanami will prepare your app for use.

> This process includes defining various Ruby constants required for your app to function, making the Ruby source files in `app/` autoloadable, and making your components (the classes you've added to the `app/` folder) lazily loadable.

Reviewer 2: "defining various Ruby constants required for your app to function" sounds too mysterious for my liking.

Could we make it a bit more specific (without going into too much detail)?

For example:

_tried to write an example and failed_

Perhaps we can just ditch it and instead focus on the impact on the user's own code? e.g.

```suggestion
This process makes the Ruby source files in `app/` autoloadable and makes your components (from the same classes defined in `app/`) lazily loadable.
```

Author: Yeah, that's heaps clearer, thanks.

This approach keeps load time to a minimum. As such, it’s the default mode in the Hanami console and when running tests.

<p class="notice">

>   A prepared application is no less able to do its job than a booted one, it will just lazily load only the components it needs to perform a particular task on demand.

Reviewer 2: I imagine "no less able" tripping up non-native English speakers. Could we remove the double negative?

Author: Very good call - removed it.

</p>

## Hanami.boot

When you call `Hanami.boot` (or use `require "hanami/boot"`) Hanami will do everything it does when `Hanami.prepare` is called, but then go further, starting each of your app's providers, while also eagerly loading all of your app's components up front.

> This is useful when you want to incur all initialization costs at boot time, such as when preparing an app to serve web requests.

Reviewer: This is somewhat repeated (see line 12) - is this on purpose?

Author: Ta - removed here.

Booting is the approach taken in Hanami's standard Puma setup. Thus, in Hanami's `config.ru` file you will see:

```ruby
# frozen_string_literal: true

require "hanami/boot"

run Hanami.app
```

> ## Stepping through the boot process

Reviewer 2: I really love this section! Does a lot to demystify the boot process ❤️

Author: I learnt a few things :)

```ruby
bundle exec irb

irb(main)>
```

Typing `Hanami` here will result in a `NameError`:

```ruby
irb(main)> Hanami
(irb):1:in `<main>': uninitialized constant Hanami (NameError)
```

Let's address that by running `require "hanami"`.

Once the Hanami module is available, calling `Hanami.setup` will load the Hanami app defined in `config/app.rb`:

```ruby
irb(main)> require "hanami"
=> true

irb(main)> Hanami.setup
=> Bookshelf::App

irb(main)> Hanami.app
=> Bookshelf::App
```

We can now ask our app whether it's prepared or booted:

```ruby
irb(main)> Hanami.app.prepared?
=> false

irb(main)> Hanami.app.booted?
=> false
```

We can also see what components are registered with the app by calling `#keys`:

```ruby
irb(main)> Hanami.app.keys
=> []
```

This makes sense, as the app hasn't even been prepared yet, meaning component registration hasn't begun!

Let's prepare the app now, then ask what component keys are registered:

```ruby
irb(main)> Hanami.prepare
=> Bookshelf::App

irb(main)> Hanami.app.prepared?
=> true

irb(main)> Hanami.app.keys
=> ["settings", "notifications"]
```

Two components are now present: `settings` and `notifications`.

> `notifications` is an instance of `Dry::Monitor::Notifications` that's registered early in the prepare process to support app-wide notifications.

Reviewer 2: It might be worth adding a couple of words here to qualify "notifications"... maybe something like:

> to support inter-component notifications (for now mostly a framework-internal concern). 

I'm a little concerned about this object spooking people a bit, not the least of which because it adopts a name that might quite likely be wanted by app authors for their own components.

Author: Thanks, adjusted!
